📝(readme) add setup documentation (#13)
openfun/social-edu-federation: README.md

This library provides an authentication backend which can be used with
[Python Social Auth](https://github.com/python-social-auth/social-core)
and optionally
[Python Social Auth - Django](https://github.com/python-social-auth/social-app-django)
to connect your application to an education SAML federation.

Before beginning, you must read the above documentations.

For now, it is only limited to the
[RENATER](https://services.renater.fr/federation/en/documentation/generale/metadata/index)'s
"Féderation Éducation-Recherche" (FER) federation.

## Architecture

`social-edu-federation` is divided in two parts:
- The SAML backend and metadata parser, customized for the FER federation,
  usable with Python Social Auth.
- The Django integration which provides: base views to provide metadata, list available
  Identity Providers and testing material for local development.

### Authentication behavior

> This library parse the metadata to extract base SAML authentication for each identity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This library parses the metadata to extract base SAML authentication for each identity
```

provider in the federation metadata plus some extra information
(see below *Setup - Core* section)

> The authentication process can be resumed in few steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The authentication process can be summarized in few steps:
```

- The federation metadata are parsed to fetch the identity providers list.

> - The user "ask to login" using the federation, using an identity provider in the above list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- User choose an identity provider in the list with which they have an account and want to login.
```

> - The backend init an SAML authentication request and "redirect" the user to the identity provider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The backend makes an SAML authentication request and redirects the user to the identity provider
```

  "single login" page.
- The user logs in on the identity provider website and is redirected to our (Service Provider) site.
- The SAML FER backend will extract authentication data it needs from the authentication response
  assertions.
  The used assertions are:
  - **urn:oid:2.5.4.4** (sn) aka (surname)
    This represents the user's first name.
  - **urn:oid:2.5.4.42** (givenName) aka (gn)
    This represents the user's last name.
  - **urn:oid:2.16.840.1.113730.3.1.241** (displayName)
    This represents the user's full name.
  - **urn:oid:0.9.2342.19200300.100.1.3** (mail)
    Provides us the user email, we use it as email address and username.
  - **urn:oid:1.3.6.1.4.1.5923.1.1.1.1** (eduPersonAffiliation)

>     Allows use to try to determine the role (student/professor).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Allows us to try to determine the role (student/professor).
```

    This is not mandatory.

  Fields we do not use:
   - **urn:oid:1.3.6.1.4.1.7135.1.2.1.14** (supannEtablissement)

>   All fields are available on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  All fields are documented on

  [Renater supann](https://services.renater.fr/documentation/supann/supann2021/recommandations/attributs/liste_des_attributs).
- The authentication response passes through the "Social auth" pipeline.
  `social-edu-federation` provides one extra step to replace the
  `social_core.pipeline.user.create_user` original one. This step allows to have a fallback
  on the user's *full name* if one of the *first name* or *last name* is not available.

## Setup

### Core

> You may install only the library core which will provide you:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may install only the library core which will provide you with:
```

- The FER metadata parser (see `social_edu_federation.parser.FederationMetadataParser`)
  which is an extension of the original `python3-saml`'s `OneLogin_Saml2_IdPMetadataParser`
  and provides extra features as:
  - Extract all the identity providers at once
  - Extract extra information from each identity provider metadata (
    the identity provider's display name,

>     the identity provider's organisation name,
>     the identity provider's organisation display name)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    the identity provider's organization name,
    the identity provider's organization display name)
```

- A basic "metadata store" which is not really helpful but organizes the process of fetching
  the metadata and convert it to a Python Social Auth like object, usable by the authentication
  backend.
- The SAML authentication backend which is preconfigured to be used with the FER federation.

```shell
$ pip install social-edu-federation
```

### Django integration

> If you also want to add this library into a Django project you may explicitly add the extra `django`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you also want to add this library into a Django project you may explicitly add the `django` extra while installing the library:
```

```shell
$ pip install social-edu-federation[django]
```

> It is also recommended to add `social_edu_federation.django.apps.PythonSocialEduFedAuthConfig`

Reviewer: why?

to your `INSTALLED_APPS`.

#### Cache management

When using the Django integration, it is highly recommended to define a Django setting to

> tell `social_edu_federation` to use the "metadata store with cache". This prevents the
> fetch of the whole federation metadata anytime we need an information about one identity
> provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tell `social_edu_federation` to use the "metadata store with cache". This will avoid fetching
the whole federation metadata everytime we need an information about one identity
provider.
```

```python
# settings.py
SOCIAL_AUTH_SAML_FER_FEDERATION_SAML_METADATA_STORE = "social_edu_federation.django.metadata_store.CachedMetadataStore"
```

> This "metadata store" will use the Django `default` cache which can be easily replaced with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This "metadata store" will use the Django `default` cache which can be easily replaced by
```

the cache backend of your choice:

```python
# settings.py
SOCIAL_AUTH_SAML_FER_DJANGO_CACHE = "redis"

assert SOCIAL_AUTH_SAML_FER_DJANGO_CACHE in CACHES, "cache backend name is not in settings.CACHES"
```

If you installed the `social_edu_federation` Django application, you will be able to

> fill the cache every night using the `prefetch_saml_fer_metadata` management

Reviewer: Saying "night" suggests that you're not providing a global service:
```suggestion
fill the cache asynchronously using the `prefetch_saml_fer_metadata` management
```

command, by defining a cron job which will call
`django-admin prefetch_saml_fer_metadata saml_fer` to refresh the FER cache.

> Using this will prevent the first user of the day to pay the full federation metadata

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using this make sure that no actual user has to wait for the full federation metadata to load
```

# SAML FER backend is overridden to allow dynamic IdPs.
# see social_edu_federation.backends.saml_fer.FERSAMLAuth.get_idp(idp_name)

# Custom parameter to define the FER Federation Metadata
SOCIAL_AUTH_SAML_FER_FEDERATION_SAML_METADATA_URL = (
    "https://metadata.federation.renater.fr/renater/main/main-idps-renater-metadata.xml"
)

# Use (or not) the default pipeline with the first/last name cleanup step
from social_edu_federation.pipeline import DEFAULT_EDU_FED_AUTH_PIPELINE
SOCIAL_AUTH_SAML_FER_PIPELINE = DEFAULT_EDU_FED_AUTH_PIPELINE
```

#### Using the default views

To make your Service Provider metadata publicly available, you will need to add
the following URL:

```python
# some_module/urls.py
from django.urls import path

from social_edu_federation.django.views import EduFedMetadataView

urlpatterns = [
    # ...
    path(
        "saml/metadata/",
        EduFedMetadataView.as_view(backend_name="saml_fer"),
        name="saml_fer_metadata",
    ),
]
```

You may also want to have a look at the provided `EduFedIdpChoiceView` which allows
to list the federation identity provider list. It includes a cookie mechanism for the

> user to easily find the latests used identity providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
user to easily find the last used identity providers.
```

An easy way to use it:

```python
# some_module/views.py
from social_edu_federation.django.views import EduFedIdpChoiceView

class CustomizedEduFederationIdpChoiceView(EduFedIdpChoiceView):
    """Display the list of all available Identity providers using our own template."""

    template_extends = "my_site/base.html"

# some_module/urls.py
from django.urls import path

from . import views

urlpatterns = [
    # ...
    path(
        "saml/renater_fer_idp_choice/",
        views.CustomizedEduFederationIdpChoiceView.as_view(backend_name="saml_fer"),
        name="saml_fer_idp_choice",
    ),
]
```

#### Testing views

`social-edu-federation` comes along with testing views to ease the development process.
Those testing views are to be used when you want to test the whole authentication loop on
your local computer.

> The detail to plug the testing views in your project is not detailled here, but you can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How to plug the testing views in your project is not detailed here, but you can
```

```

It is also recommended to add `social_edu_federation.django.apps.PythonSocialEduFedAuthConfig`
to your `INSTALLED_APPS` to get the following features:

- A Django check which asserts the default "metadata store" is overridden.
- The `prefetch_saml_fer_metadata` management command (see *Cache management* below).

> - The static files and Django views default templates (see *Using the default views* below).

Author: @sampaccoud does it answer to the question? Or should I remove the "recommendation" ?

Reviewer: perfect thank you for the clarification :pray:
